Add MP4 (#80)
illinois-cs498vr/illinois-cs498vr.github.io: _assignments/mp4.md

---
layout: assignment
title: "MP4: Flight Simulator"
parts:
  -
    title: MP4
    due: March 25, 2019 @ 11:59 PM
material:
  -
    name: Starting Unity package
    url: https://courses.engr.illinois.edu/cs498vr3/fa2018/mps/MP4v2.unitypackage
rubric:
  -
    name: Plane
    points: 5
    description: Game has a controllable plane
  -
    name: Acceleration/Deceleration
    points: 5
    description: Plane can accelerate and decelerate comfortably
  -
    name: Rotation
    points: 10

>     description: TPlane can yaw, pitch, and roll.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    description: Plane can yaw, pitch, and roll
```
rm period for consistency purposes

  -
    name: Uses Touch Controllers
    points: 25
    description: Plane control scheme makes inventive use of rotation and position tracking of touch controllers
  -
    name: Weapon
    points: 10
    description: Pressing a button shoots out a raycast or bullet from the plane
  -
    name: Spheres
    points: 5
    description: There are spheres around the terrain
  -
    name: Shooting Game
    points: 25
    description: Player can shoot spheres, which disappear, then reappear
  -
    name: Tutorial
    points: 10

>     description: Game has in-world tutorial that clearly communicates how to control the plane

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    description: Game has an in-world tutorial that clearly communicates how to control the plane
```

  -
    name: Start Menu
    points: 10
    description: Game has a legible and understandable in-world start menu
  -
    name: Laser pointer
    points: 20
    description: The Start Menu is controlled by an in-game, grabbable laser pointer
  -
    name: Displaying Score
    points: 5
    description: Score is displayed in-world
  -
    name: Sound
    points: 20
    description: Elements of the simulator that should have sound, do.
  -
    name: Game over
    points: 10
    description: Game handles plane crashes in some manner
  -
    name: Framerate/Comfort
    points: 20

>     description: Framerate rarely drops below 60 fps, game sound is not obnoxious, and plane acceleration, deceleration, and rotations are comfortable.

Reviewer 2: Also remind about best practices here?

  -
    name: Interactive tutorial

>     points: 20 EC

Reviewer: I thought the way the way to flag rubric items for extra credit is through another key in the YAML item, not appending "EC" to the end of the `points` key

    description: The tutorial provided to the player is interactive
  -

points: 200
---

> 

Reviewer: Curiosity strikes. Did we decide to remove the "This is a long assignment" boilerplate this year?

## Part 1 - Environment and Flight

### Simulator Environment

> 1. Create a new scene, and load the provided Unity package, which contains a large terrain for you to use. Read up on [Terrains in Unity](https://docs.unity3d.com/Manual/script-Terrain.html) 

Reviewer: I'd _very gently_ (i.e. don't do this unless you're super bored) suggest putting single line breaks at the ends of each sentence (NOT DOUBLE as that will reflow the markdown). This makes it slightly easier to read in the web editor, which enforces line wraps that make the paragraphs look really odd.

   so you can make changes if need be. This will be especially pertinent when it comes time to optimize your scene, as trees and vegetation 
   on the terrain can cause performance issues.

> 2. Create or import a model for your plane. Your model can be simple, provided it isn’t simply a Unity cube (or other 3D primitive).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create or import a model for your plane. Your model can be simple, provided it isn’t simply a Unity cube or other 3D primitive.
```

2. Somewhere in this room, place a start menu. At the very minimum, your menu must include the option to quit and to start the game.

3. Upon selecting quit, the game should exit. Upon selecting start, the player should be transported to your flight simulator scene.

4. We have provided a model for a pointing device. The start menu MUST be controlled by picking up this device with the touch controllers, 
   and pointing it at the menu options. The player should be able to select the option being pointed at by pressing the A button. You MAY NOT 
   control the menu with the touch controller joysticks. Hint: [Ray Casting](https://unity3d.com/learn/tutorials/modules/beginner/physics/raycasting) is a useful technique, and there are online resources for figuring 
   out Touch input, such as the [Unity manual](https://docs.unity3d.com/Manual/OculusControllers.html) and the [Oculus developer guide](https://developer.oculus.com/documentation/unity/latest/concepts/unity-ovrinput/).

### Flight

Your plane must be comfortable, easy to control, and should feel like a real plane. For instance, real planes cannot turn in place, and cannot 
stay in the air while standing still.

> 1. You must use the touch controllers to control the plane. You can implement multiple types of controls during your development, but we will 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. You must use the touch controllers to control the plane. You can implement multiple control schemes during development, but we will 
```
subjective phrasing suggestion

   only check the version with the touch controllers. 

2. Your plane must be able to accelerate/decelerate, and yaw, pitch, and roll. You should implement these functions in your own way with 
   the touch controllers and Oculus Rift. 

3. You MUST use the rotation and/or position tracking of the touch controllers in your control scheme somehow. Experiment with different 
   configurations to figure out a comfortable and intuitive setup. Remember to consult the Oculus Best Practices Guide for suggestions. 

---

## Part 2 - Make it a Game!

### Shooting Game

You are now going to take your flight simulator, and turn it into a shooting game.

1. Add a weapon, either a laser or physical bullets/rockets, to your plane. You decide from where the ray/bullets emanate from the plane. 

>    Do not use Unity’s Debug.DrawLine for your laser, as it will not appear in a built executable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Do not use Unity’s `Debug.DrawLine` for your laser, as it will not appear in a built executable.
```
Programming names should use monospace

3. For 20 points of extra credit, make your tutorial interactive. This means the player should initiate the tutorial, and receive 
   prompts to perform actions. Upon performing these actions, the player should receive feedback, and the tutorial should advance. 
   For example, the tutorial could prompt the player to “Throw the controller across the room in order to accelerate”. Upon hurling the controller, 
   the player would see some indication that the plane has sped up, and get a message saying “good job”.

### Sound

Add all necessary sounds to your simulator. Some examples include engine noise, crash sounds, firing sounds, ambient music, etc. Make sure that your 
sounds are neither too loud, nor too quiet to hear, and make for a comfortable experience.

### "Game Over" Condition

When the player crashes the plane, they should see a game over screen, which should give the option to go back to the main menu, restart the game, or quit.
If your game over screen has a menu, you can choose how it will be controlled, but make sure this is communicated to the player via the tutorial, or messages 

> included in the “game over” menu screen (such as “juggle the touch controllers to return to the main menu”).

Reviewer: NO NO NO NO PLEASE DO NOT JUGGLE THE TOUCH CONTROLLERS!!!

Reviewer 2: There are supposed to be footnotes for this and line 161...

Author: Is there a better way to do footnotes than how I did it in the last commit?

### Overall Design

“Overall Design” is a vague definition, but we are going to evaluate it along the following dimensions:

1. Your interface/instruction system works as expected: a first time player, without any prior knowledge of your simulator, should be able to pick up the controls quickly and easily.

> 2. The overall experience of flying your plane should be smooth and comfortable. For example: Are rotations comfortable? Does your plane handle as expected? Does the weapon work as expected?

Reviewer: is it possible that we can expand "handle" from a one word definition?

Author: what about a change to "behave" or "control"? Would that be a better choice?

Reviewer: yeah. I'm mainly concerned that "handle" is just arcane terminology in general.

Reviewer 2: Changed to "behave"

> 3. Your flight simulator should be polished. That is, there should be few, if any, noticable glitches, controls should work as intended, and the frame rate should be consistently at or above 60fps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Your flight simulator should be polished. That is, there should be few, if any, noticeable glitches, controls should work as intended, and the frame rate should be consistently at or above 60fps.
```
spelling

---

> #### Submit: 

Reviewer: remove this entire section, the submission instructions should appear right below the assignment text anyways

    points: 25
    description: Player can shoot spheres, which disappear, then reappear
  -
    name: Tutorial
    points: 10
    description: Game has an in-world tutorial that clearly communicates how to control the plane
  -
    name: Start Menu
    points: 10
    description: Game has a legible and understandable in-world start menu
  -
    name: Laser pointer
    points: 20
    description: The Start Menu is controlled by an in-game, grabbable laser pointer
  -
    name: Displaying Score
    points: 5
    description: Score is displayed in-world
  -
    name: Sound
    points: 20
    description: Elements of the simulator that should have sound, do.
  -
    name: Game over
    points: 10
    description: Game handles plane crashes in some manner
  -
    name: Framerate/Comfort
    points: 40
    description: Framerate rarely drops below 60 fps, game sound is not obnoxious, and plane acceleration, deceleration, and rotations are comfortable. Game conforms to Oculus Best Practices Guide
  -
    name: Interactive tutorial
    points: 20
    extra: true
    description: The tutorial provided to the player is interactive (Extra Credit)

points: 200
---
## Overview

> Welcome to MP4! In this MP, you are going to build a flight simulator in Unity. You are going to construct a start menu and tutorial, write script to support your plane, make a UI, and optimize the game to fulfill requirements from the [Oculus Best Practices Guide](https://developer.oculus.com/design/latest/concepts/book-bp/)! 

Reviewer: recommend to add line break under this header to be consistent with all the other ones

    points: 10
    description: Game handles plane crashes in some manner
  -
    name: Framerate/Comfort
    points: 40
    description: Framerate rarely drops below 60 fps, game sound is not obnoxious, and plane acceleration, deceleration, and rotations are comfortable. Game conforms to Oculus Best Practices Guide
  -
    name: Interactive tutorial
    points: 20
    extra: true
    description: The tutorial provided to the player is interactive (Extra Credit)

points: 200
---
## Overview
Welcome to MP4! In this MP, you are going to build a flight simulator in Unity. You are going to construct a start menu and tutorial, write script to support your plane, make a UI, and optimize the game to fulfill requirements from the [Oculus Best Practices Guide](https://developer.oculus.com/design/latest/concepts/book-bp/)! 
Much of the spec for this MP is vague. This is intentional, as we want you to be in the practice of finding creative solutions to problems. Note: This is an assignment with a lot of details, so please _start early_.

**PLEASE REGULARLY SAVE YOUR WORK IN THIS MP, AS UNITY MIGHT CRASH AT ANY TIME!**

---

## Part 1 - Environment and Flight

### Simulator Environment

> 1. Create a new scene, and load the provided Unity package, which contains a large terrain for you to use. Read up on [Terrains in Unity](https://docs.unity3d.com/Manual/script-Terrain.html) 

Reviewer 3: Change to something like "Create a new scene, and load all three of the provided Unity packages, one of which contains a large terrain for you to use"

### "Game Over" Condition

When the player crashes the plane, they should see a game over screen, which should give the option to go back to the main menu, restart the game, or quit.
If your game over screen has a menu, you can choose how it will be controlled, but make sure this is communicated to the player via the tutorial, or messages 
included in the “game over” menu screen (such as “juggle the touch controllers to return to the main menu”). [**\*\***](#footnotes)

### Overall Design

“Overall Design” is a vague definition, but we are going to evaluate it along the following dimensions:

1. Your interface/instruction system works as expected: a first time player, without any prior knowledge of your simulator, should be able to pick up the controls quickly and easily.

1. The overall experience of flying your plane should be smooth and comfortable. For example: Are rotations comfortable? Does your plane behave as expected? Does the weapon work as expected?

1. Your flight simulator should be polished. That is, there should be few, if any, noticeable glitches, controls should work as intended, and the frame rate should be consistently at or above 60fps.

---

> #### Footnotes

Reviewer 4: Minor issue: Can we change the font size of Footnotes to the same size as other section headings? When the "*" or "**" link to the section, the top bar covers "footnotes" and part of "Don't do this". Other than this, things look good to me.

  -
    name: Framerate/Comfort
    points: 20
    description: Framerate rarely drops below 60 fps, game sound is not obnoxious, and plane acceleration, deceleration, and rotations are comfortable. Game conforms to Oculus Best Practices Guide
  -
    name: Interactive tutorial
    points: 20 EC
    description: The tutorial provided to the player is interactive

points: 200
---
## Overview

> Welcome to MP4! In this MP, you are going to build a flight simulator in Unity. You are going to construct a start menu and tutorial, write script to support your plane, make a UI, and optimize the game to fulfill requirements from the [Oculus Best Practices Guide](https://developer.oculus.com/design/latest/concepts/book-bp/)!Much of the spec for this MP is vague. This is intentional, as we want you to be in the practice of finding creative solutions to problems. Note: This is an assignment with a lot of details, so please start early.

Reviewer 3: Missing space between "...Best Practices Guide!" and "Much of the..."

> **PLEASE REGULARLY SAVE YOUR WORK IN THIS MP, AS UNITY MIGHT CRASH AT ANY TIME!**

Reviewer 3: Add an empty line between line 77 and 78 so that line 78's text shows in new line
